\chapter{Introduction} \label{chap:chap1}

% Contextualization (goal: 1/2 page)

The XIX century marked a significant shift in the world's perception of energy
resources as the desire to invest in renewable energy sources to power modern
societies grew. This transition was driven by the need to reduce dependency on
fossil fuels, mitigate the effects of global warming, and slow climate change.
Solar photovoltaic energy is a desirable renewable energy source due to its
abundance, accessibility, and environmental benefits. Renewable energy sources
offer a range of benefits, including reduced greenhouse gas emissions, improved
air quality, and increased energy security. While solar photovoltaic energy has
proven to be both cost-efficient and environmentally friendly, it also comes
with unprecedented challenges, such as its intermittent nature, low electrical
inertia, complex forecasting, and geographic-dependent operating conditions.
Despite these challenges, recent reports \cite{cap} show that the economic
benefits of investing in renewable energy outweigh the complications, as there
is an increasing global investment trend in these sources.

% Motivation (goal: 2 paragraphs)
The general construction of PV farms, particularly on the utility-scale, has led
to a need for effective maintenance and monitoring to ensure maximum efficiency
and operational reliability. To achieve this, various algorithms and routines
are used to monitor the state of PV farms and identify any potential issues that
may arise. Fault detection is a crucial aspect of this process, as it allows PV
farm operators to identify and address any problems that may occur quickly.
Given the importance of maintaining high levels of operation, knowing if action
is needed to restore or fix components from an anomalous scenario is desirable.
By detecting faults and identifying the necessary steps, PV farm operators can
prevent or minimize downtime and ensure optimal performance.

Integrating intermittent energy resources into modern electric grids has led to
stricter requirements for connecting such power systems to ensure safe grid
operating conditions. As a result, companies that own or plan to build
photovoltaic farms must comply with these requirements and have adequate power
electronics and monitoring/control capabilities. Failure to meet these
requirements can result in sanctions or fines for the responsible party, as well
as potential impacts on system availability, asset value, and disturbance
propagation to the grid. To minimize these risks and maximize the value of their
assets, companies may opt to implement fault detection and state estimation
tools. These tools allow for the early detection and resolution of potential
issues and can prevent or minimize downtime. The need to create or improve
existing fault detection and state estimation tools, and the search for the most
effective methodologies for addressing these issues, drive research in this
field.

% Investigation questions
Having laid the basis for why there must be system behavior assessment in
utility-scale PV plants, it is necessary to understand what business concepts
are crucial to this field. In the course of this work, the presented topics will
go over the following questions:

\begin{itemize}
    \item What components mostly fail in photovoltaic power systems?
    \item What is the average frequency of faults?
    \item What fault detection/state estimation tools exist for photovoltaic
    power systems?
    \item What are the most successful ones?
    \item What's their structure? Are they mostly centralized or decentralized?
    \item What are their computational costs/efficiency?
    \item What is the expected magnitude of precision and confidence?
    \item Which key performance indicators can evaluate the success of these
    tools? 
    \item What are their implementation difficulties?
\end{itemize}

% Goals
With these questions uncovered, the main objective is to adapt or design a novel
algorithm/approach to fault detection based on modern artificial intelligence
solutions. However, this can be split up into finer goals:

\begin{itemize}
    \item  Identify and study existing fault detection tools for photovoltaic
    power systems.
    \item  Adapt or develop a new tool.
    \item Apply and test the new tool in real case study PV assets.
    \item Validate the developed methodologies by comparison to reference tools.
\end{itemize}

% Methodology
Before reviewing state-of-the-art fault detection tools, types of failures in
photovoltaic systems need to be understood: find which components usually fail,
which ones fail more often, and how often. For this, it is necessary to
understand such components' physical and electrical properties and the modeling
techniques used to characterize them. There will be an assessment of
utility-scale power plants architecture through literature, alongside the
detection objective of state-of-the-art fault detection tools applied in this
field. Then, there shall be an extensive analysis and review of what tools have
been designed and used in this field. In this step, critical evaluation of the
literature is a must for understanding the tool's scope, ease of implementation,
and understanding that the data sets available for this work are compatible.
Having selected the most prominent ones, they're to be qualitatively and
quantitatively compared to each other in their application context so that the
results allow objective evaluations. This process requires implementing these
tools, following the guidelines in the respective article/book/report, verifying
their metrics, and checking if the achieved results resemble the same as the
literature suggests. It will require gathering data sets, which can either be
artificially generated through simulation or provided by an enterprise that
services photovoltaic plant owners.


% Impact and expected results
There's a desire that, in the end, the developed work helps achieve an improved
method for fault detection and state estimation in photovoltaic power systems,
resulting in a production-ready software application agile enough to deploy for
any PV assets. Depending on the new algorithm's characteristics, it could result
in an approach capable of generalization and application to other engineering
systems, benefiting more than just PV systems. No matter the chosen methodology,
fault detection will, in most cases, result in an economic benefit, catastrophe
prevention, and safety increase. Those are a few positive contributions that are
possible for this work's outcome.